---
layout: post
title: pronouns in my dumb conlang
description: I recently made an alarming development in my dumb conlang.
date: 2019-01-02 14:32
tags:
  - languages
  - conlang
---

Yesterday, I made massive progress in my dumb constructed language. It's basically just a weird mix of English, Spanish, Esperanto, and French.

## Pronouns

| Pronoun             | Nominative  | Objective | Possessive  |
| ------------------- | ----------- | --------- | ----------- |
| 1st person singular | _je_ (_j'_) | _me_      | _mi_ (_m'_) |
| 1st person plural   | _nos_       | _nos_     | _nos_       |
| 2nd person singular | _tu_ (_t'_) | _tu_      | _ti_ (_t'_) |
| 2nd person plural   | _vos_       | _vos_     | _vos_       |
| 3rd person singular | _lo_        | _lo_      | _d'lo_      |
| 3rd person plural   | _los_       | _los_     | _d'los_     |

Objective case is the same as in English; it's used when the noun is in a prepositional phrase or is the direct object.

## Verbs

There are three tenses: the past, present, future, and past future.

The past tense of _mort_ (kill) is _a mort_. _a_ means "have," so _a mort_ is like English's perfect tense: "have killed." My conlang doesn't make a distinction between simple past and perfect; I hope this doesn't go wrong.

The future tense of _mort_ is _t'mort_; _t'_ means "to," so _t'mort_ is like "is to kill." This isn't how infinitives are formed in my language; this is just leftover feature from when I had infinitives. This can be combined with the past tense marker _a_ to make _a t'mort_: "would kill." I'm not sure what tense this would be called; I think "subjunctive," but a more sensible name would probably be "past future." I am not an expert.

Verbs can be made into nouns by adding the _-ac_ suffix, like English's _-tion_ suffix (act of _X_). So _mortac_ is the act of killing.

I'm stealing Spanish's flipped "Y pleases X" for "X likes Y" sentences. _plez_ is "please" in my language, so

> He likes to kill fish.
>
> _Mortac d'pic plez lo._
>
> lit. Act of killing fish pleases him.

(I'm thinking of making a new preposition here because _mortac d'pic_, or the murder of the fish, could mean the fish are either the murderers or the victims. _mortac PREP pic_ would clarify that the fish are the direct objects of the action, and _d'_ would be used for the subject; it's used for possession as well, so I think this makes sense.)

I haven't figured out participles yet. Will do.

## Other things

The vocabulary I have for this language is pretty dumb. Allow me to enlighten you.

With the slightly arbitrary word making process I have, "time" (ES _tiempo_, EO _tempo_), "**temp**erature," and "**temp**orary" are all the same word (_temp_). I haven't made enough sentences to see if this causes a problem.<span data-dumb=** data-fixing-markdown-syntax-highlighting-lol></span>

A bigger problem is egg (ES _huevo_, EO _ovo_) and sheep (ES _oveja_, English "ovine") are the same word: _ov_. However, I see this as a feature; they're both very innocent words, so children's books would probably play on this a lot.

The plurals of nouns are generally just given _-s_, unless the singular form ends in an _s_, in which case the suffix becomes _-'s_. Also, if the singular ends in a _q_, the _q_ becomes an _x_ instead of an _s_ being added.

```
bov -> bovs (cows)
urs -> urs's (bears)
cliq -> clix (clicks)
```

## Sentences

Since adjectives come before nouns in my language, if they come after, they're probably the predicate. From my last post, I explained how nouns, adjectives, and prepositional phrases can be implicitly casted to a predicate where their translation in English would have an added "to be."

> _L'person intel._
>
> Lit. The person intelligent
>
> The person is intelligent.

> _L'bov un magiqist._
>
> Lit. The cow a magician
>
> The cow is a magician.

> _J'd'California._
>
> Lit. I of California
>
> I am from California.

Right now, prepositional phrases are a bit confusing. For example, _l'ov d'l'bov_ could either mean "the egg of the cow" or "The egg is the cow's." Maybe that's okay. Not sure.

_Everything here is subject to change._
